If God was the vote counter, Donald Trump says he’d win in a landslide.

The Republican nominee suggested on Thursday that divine intervention in next week’s election would reveal him as the rightful winner of even Democratic bastions like California.

On one level, Trump’s comment shows how his false election fraud claims have entered the outer realms of absurdity.

But this goes beyond hyperbole. Trump — who altered reality for tens of millions of Americans by claiming he was cheated out of power four years ago — is creating a sinister threat to the 2024 election and spinning a legacy of fractured trust that could taint presidential votes long after he’s left the stage. The election fraud claims that Trump most notably supercharged in 2020 to salve his humiliation at losing to Joe Biden are already at high intensity this year.

thumb.jpg
Related article
‘January 6th is going to be pretty fun’: How MAGA activists are preparing to undermine the election if Trump loses

After laying out the darkest closing argument in modern American history, Trump is now increasingly turning to poisoning public confidence in the election. In New Mexico on Thursday, he falsely claimed the state was actually in his column in 2016 and 2020. “I believe we won it twice,” he said. “If we could bring God down from heaven and he’d be the vote counter, we’d win this, we’d win California, we’d win a lot of states. … You have just got to keep the votes honest.”

In reality, Trump lost New Mexico twice, by 8 and 11 points, and his claims he could win Democratic strongholds like California but for vote fraud are wildly off base. But they are part of a clear and deliberate strategy that is unfolding before the eyes of millions of voters to create an impression that Tuesday’s election will be fraudulent. This might seed ground for legal challenges if Trump loses, and it also serves to crank up fury among his supporters already primed by past false fraud claims. Trump is also working in conjunction with the conservative media machine to create an impression that his victory is a certainty and that a win for Vice President Kamala Harris and Democrats can only be the result of fraud.

The ex-president’s increasing efforts to shatter the credibility of the 2024 election, as an apparent Plan B if he loses, coincide with a widening effort by GOP officials and “Make America Great Again” activists to position to undermine any Harris victory in courts, local election jurisdictions and even in state legislatures.

Comprehensive recent reporting by CNN has detailed these schemes.

For instance, an investigation published on Thursday showed that some of the same activists who tried to overturn Biden’s victory in 2020 are building a step-by-step plan to undermine the results if Trump falls short again.
Trump and Republican National Committee officials have increasingly floated claims about potential issues with mail-in ballots in Pennsylvania.
House Freedom Caucus Chairman Andy Harris, a Maryland Republican, said that “it makes a lot of sense” to allocate North Carolina’s electoral voters before votes are tallied because of the risk that the aftermath of Hurricane Helene could make it hard for some voters to cast ballots. The congressman later said the comment was taken out of context, but it revived fears that some GOP state legislatures — acting on hyped-up claims of fraud or other reasoning — could ignore the will of voters and award election victories to Trump.
Republicans have also made extensive efforts, including in the House of Representatives, to highlight what experts say is the almost non-existent problem of voting by non-citizens.
In one case this week, Virginia Gov. Glenn Youngkin pushed an 11th-hour effort to remove 1,600 suspected non-citizens from the rolls despite concerns the move will sweep up and disenfranchise some American citizens. A divided US Supreme Court allowed it.
CNN reported Thursday that a misinformation microphone wielded by X owner and Trump supporter Elon Musk has become impossible for election officials in key battleground states to counter.
This catalogue of challenges to the fairness of the 2024 election, taken together with Trump’s increasing, bellicose claims of corruption, is creating a surreal new reality, given that the United States is the world’s most important democracy and has long been regarded by outsiders as the gold standard of self-governance.